in response to the militant Palestinian
group hamas's attack on Israel Sweden
and the EU while reviewing their
non-humanitarian aid to Palestinians
while accusations are flying about a
so-called double standard in the West's
actions in the Middle East and Ukraine
we shouldn't have any double standards
we should apply the same standards when
it comes to atrocities committee my
guest this week on conflict zone is
Swedish foreign minister Tobias bilstrom
he joins me from Stockholm as the
bombardment of Gaza intensifies How
concerned is he that the conflict could
spread in the region and with the risk
of attention being diverted how can he
continue to shore up support for the war
in
[Music]
Ukraine foreign minister billstrom
welcome to conflict Zone thank you very
much there are fears that the Israel
Hamas War could widen into a broader
Middle East conflict as Israel steps up
its bombardment of Gaza and clashes at
Israel's northern border with Lebanon
intensif
how are you looking at the current
situation well it is indeed a very very
horrible situation which is now uh
evolving before our eyes and I think
that we have to look at this from both a
shortterm and a long-term perspective
the short-term perspective is of course
that we need to bring more humanitarian
assistance to Gaza we need to
acknowledge that Reser has the right to
defend itself against the atrocities and
the terrorist attacks by the teror organ
organization Hamas and Islamic yihad but
we also have to look to the suffering of
the people in Gaza and to find a way to
bring humanitarian assistance in the
shape of water um supplies food and also
fuel for the the salination um plants
inside of Gaza to to get fresh water to
to the people in there is important and
the other hand we also have to look at
the very important issue of releasing
the hostages taken by by Hamas and in
this I can see many actors playing an
important role the European Union the
United States the UN of course but also
the Arab states who I think are acting
acting in a very constructive way I have
done a reach out to colleagues in in
this regard and that's my feeling the EU
has increased its humanitarian Aid to
the Palestinians but at the same time
you will be reviewing your
non-humanitarian
Aid what does that mean are are you just
now checking if you indirectly gave
money to Hamas which the EU as you've
mentioned there classifies as a
terrorist
organization I think that under the
circumstances it is prudent to see to it
that no money which is allocated to the
Palestinian Authority Finds Its way into
the pockets of organizations like Hamas
or Islamic yihad but in the long term
this is also connected to the question
of the peace process we need to see to
if the Palestinian Authority can
functions and that it is a credible
organization because if we are going for
a two-state solution and this has to be
the long-term perspective to establish
peace in the region uh two states
israels and Palestinians being able to
leave side by side are you thinking
about whether you will in fact reduce
non-humanitarian aid for example on the
EU level because I mean the EU is the
biggest single donor of Aid to
Palestinians well from an EU perspective
uh I don't see that happening I think
that it is important and I I think that
there's a clear majority also in the
council in favor of this uh I also we
have to understand that you know
undermining The credibility of the
Palestinian Authority would be a
dangerous thing that could actually help
Hamas and Islamic Jihad to gain
supporters in in the in the pal in
Palestine in in both the West Bank and
Gaza and that would be uh that would be
a really dangerous when we look at the
overall EU approach so far um what we
have seen is disunity and confusion on
display first there was a statement that
the EU said it suspended its Aid to
Palestinians in response to the attack
on Israel by Hamas that statement was
reversed soon thereafter isn't it a bit
embarrassing in the middle of a crisis
like
this I think that we have to separate
the issues it is quite clear that that
statement was premature but that was
done by an individual commissioner not
by the commission itself and when it
comes to the member states well it is
the member states who are calling the
shorts in on this and it is the member
states also ultimately who decides this
and I have to say that I've just come
back from yesterday's meeting in
Luxembourg with the feeling that yes
there are debates and discussions quite
naturally in a heated moment like this
but the EU has to maintain and Achieve
Unity now we have an upcoming meeting
with the leaders the European Council
now Wednesday and that I think will
bring some more clarity to this but you
know what it does speak to Mr foreign
minister is is how the EU expects to
find consensus on the future of aid for
Palestinians and just the general
approach to the situation um I'd like to
ask you about one aspect of that how
about for example calling for a
ceasefire so that that crucial Aid that
you mentioned the humanitarian Aid may
be let into Gaza for those civilians the
UN is calling for it EU foreign
ministers couldn't agree at a meeting
earlier this week where do you
stand well we stand on the side of a
high representative yoseph Bell who has
spoken about a humanitarian puse I think
that this is the way forward we have to
understand again that this is a very
complex situation no easy easy solutions
to this no quick fixes but a
humanitarian puse will be a would enable
us to bring the aid into to gasa to the
suffering people in forms of food and
water and and medicine and also Fuel and
I think this is important you spoke a
little bit earlier about uh diplomacy
and the prospect of a two-state solution
um you know Sweden in general back in
2014 was the first EU member in Western
Europe to officially recognize a state
of Palestine saying and I'm quoting here
um we hope this will show the way for
others you've been supporting
Palestinians toward a two-state solution
is there any hope of that anymore
realistically
yeah well the two-state solution has to
be achieved because it is the only way
the only feasible way of bringing peace
to this region to the people who are
suffering to both Israelis and to Pal
Palestinians and there are credible
Solutions on the table and have been for
many many years now but but what it
boils down to is that you have to
achieve trust and you have to achieve
confidence enough among leaders and one
thing though that I take a bit of Hope
in and I I think one has to understand
of course that during a moment like this
when the bombs are falling it doesn't
perhaps seem see perhaps you don't feel
like this but actually after every big
crisis of the last 20 years there has
been a restart of a peace process and a
way forward and I think we have to
understand that this could be the
outcome of this terrible situation which
we're are facing right now and frankly
the Swedish government don't really see
an alternative to the two-state solution
so we're going to work in favor of this
with partners both in the Middle East
with the United States with the UN and
within the EU of which we are a part
let's turn now uh to the impact inside
the eu's borders um we are seeing
heightened security concerns here in
Europe over the situation in the Middle
East uh the EU foreign policy Chief
Joseph borell said last week uh that
when he hears and I'm quoting here
religious authorities speaking the
language of interreligious conflict and
explicitly stating that Europe is a
party to the conflict he feels the storm
clouds are looming
he says he believes we are on the edge
of the Abyss do you agree with
him I think that he's on to something
very important that we have to find a
balanced way forward we have to
acknowledge the indispensable right of
Israel to defend itself against
terrorist attacks Frankly Speaking which
government wouldn't do that when you are
faced with the slaughtering of your own
citizens in in thousands as as has been
the case on the 7th of of October
atrocities so European countries there
increasing their security measures
including border checks as a result um
of the conflict and a series of violent
attacks here including two Swedish
Nationals killed in Brussels last week
by a gunman claiming allegiance to the
so-called Islamic State presumably in
response to a number of recent Quan
burnings in Sweden this past year tell
us a little bit more about the security
situation and how it's affecting Sweden
in
particular well the terrorist deed was
of course terrible uh and and we we are
you know we're all in shock together
with the people the near and the dear
who suffer the loss of of the lives of
of the family members we also have to
look of course to the security situation
you mention it and and I think we have
to do with this on many levels the
Swedish Security Police already during
the uh the summer raised the level of
terrorist threat from three to a four on
a five scale and uh we actually uh were
afraid that something like this which
happened in in Belgium could happen but
that mustn't deter us from continuing
along the same path that we have already
started to throt and that is to clamp
down on terrorism and we have to do this
with the help of the police but we also
have to do it with the dialogue with
people so that we can push back the
terrorist threats and and the levels
which we see are rising now in our
society but can you tell us a little bit
more about how you're clamping down um
on the incidents that have caused so
much anger because you know many in the
Muslim world are Furious about these
public Quran burnings that have taken
place in your country and i' just like
to bring in the example in June because
um there we understand that two men were
watched by a crowd of people they tore
Pages out of the Quran they burned them
outside of a mosque um and they were
granted a permit for demonstration
that's how things work in your country
they didn't hide their intent to burn
the book and yet the New York Times
reported this um that the demonstrations
were not allowed to burn objects in
Stockholm so how is it that these
demonstrators were able to ultimately
burn the
book the reason is that the Swedish
legislation is constructed in a way that
we give permits for demonstrations but
as you said quite rightly they do not
have a permit to burn the book to burn
hly scripture the Quran or any any other
book what the Swedish government is now
doing is that we have launched an
inquiry into the public order act which
governs the police police authorities um
responsibility to Grant permits and that
inquiry means that it all it would also
lead to uh an opportunity to look into
to the possibility of bringing National
Security when you grant a naal when you
grant a permit something which you
cannot do today and this is a tool which
the government wants to know more about
and and Mr foreign minister your
neighbor Denmark for example they're
taking moves to actually outrightly ban
Quran burnings following outrage over
burnings there as well is it time for
Sweden to think about doing the
same the problem is that Denmark and
Sweden have different legislations if we
were to do the thing which we are doing
in Denmark that would be a
constitutional issue it has to lead to
constitutional changes in Sweden while
if Denmark were to do what we are
planning to do changing the public order
act that would lead to constitutional
changes in their legislation because
they don't operate permits Russia has
meantime been spreading narratives
especially in the developing World
saying saying that Sweden is hostile
toward Islam uh for example the Kremlin
controlled Outlets created a rumor that
Swedish Social Services were
systematically kidnapping and trying to
christianize children from Muslim
families that campaign is said to have
reached hundreds of millions of
followers on social media how widespread
is disinformation like this how big is
the problem for
you it is a big problem and we can see
that states both Russia State and State
actors Russia and Iran is also another
country which has furthered this this
campaign and promoted it in in social
media channels and it is a very very um
aggressive campaign and it aims both
towards Muslims in in other countries
and Muslims in my own countries uh in my
own country we are now combating this uh
we have brought together the responsible
authorities in Sweden all the way down
to municipality level and all the way up
to National authorities in order to
hammer out a counter campaign to this
and we are well on this from the
government side to do so we're also
going to do it together with partners
and we have to understand that this is
the new information Warfare um
operational Arena which we are living
through this is the way things are going
to be conducted that you find things
small grains of Truth and then you blow
them up it's an old Russian trick but
you have to work against it let's turn
now to the war in Ukraine how worried
are you that attention and weapons will
be diverted elsewhere given the conflict
in the Middle East uh for example we've
seen the US uh saying last week that
tens of thousands of artillery shells
promised to Ukraine are now going to be
diverted to Israel a sign of more to
come you know I'm quite confident in the
words of President Biden when he was
interviewed we other day and said you
know we are the United States of course
we are capable of handling two conflicts
at the same time and I'm quite confident
that that that this would be the case
and also the conflict in Israel is not
the conflict in Ukraine it is not only
in a much much smaller scale it is also
different in in its entire makeup the
war in Ukraine it's a large scale War uh
something you know we haven't seen in
Europe since the second world war so we
have to look at it from that point of
view but as I said we're quite confident
in in the words of President Biden but
where do you get that confidence um Mr
foreign minister because I mean it's
it's quite clear that uh the US
president doesn't always have his
Congress behind him we've also been
seeing divisions in the EU over Russia
um they have been taken to the next
level in fact after hungary's orbon met
with Putin we've also seen the election
of Robert FICO in Slovakia who ran on an
anti- Ukraine platform basically showing
how quickly the tide can turn especially
considering that Slovakia was the first
country to deliver fighter jets to
Ukraine aren't you concerned about EU
unity and support for Ukraine I mean
this is seems like a clear sign of of
waning European support President Biden
is clearly cont cont lating a package to
be B Congress consisting of Aid to both
Ukraine Israel and Taiwan in in the same
combination I think that's needs to be
brought into to to the scope to
understand the political realities and I
again we feel confident about this
looking then to the EU well uh during
the the recent Swedish EU presidency
during the Spring um we were able to
bring forward two new s sanction
packages against Russia and I think that
we are able to maintain unity and move
forward
and I'm I'm not worried about this but
we have to constantly contemplate it and
not taking it for granted that's that
needs to be said and we above all we
have to give acknowledge acknowledgement
to the huge effort by the American
people I've said this publicly and I'll
say it again the fact that the US has
provided so much Military Support to
Ukraine is the reason why Ukraine is
still standing as a state the EU has
done a lot when it comes to financial
support to Ukraine budgetary support but
we need to do more when it comes to
Military Support and acknowledge what
the US people are doing for Ukraine
experts say that one of the few weapon
systems that could change the course of
the war's fighter jets Sweden says that
it will only provide its grip in war
planes to Ukraine if it gets NATO
accession is there no chance of you
providing these war planes
beforehand well I was present at the
press conference at hon the the prime
minister's summer resident when
President sadinski visited us earlier
this this Autumn and what the Prime
Minister said then it still stands
namely that we have to see to it that
our NATO accession process is finalized
but we are already now training
Ukrainian fighter yet Pilots how quickly
could you get Ukraine the planes if you
are indeed admitted to
Nato well I'm not going to talk about
that because that is of course military
Secrets but what I could say clearly is
that once we have become NATO members
things will be be in a different light
but we have to look to our own Security
First that is that is of course imminent
and imperative another security threat
recent attacks on underseas
infrastructure this time a Communication
cable between Sweden and Estonia in the
Baltic Sea a gas pipeline connecting
Finland and Estonia also damaged your
prime minister has warned that these
undersea data cables are both essential
to the modern economy and vulnerable to
attack how vulnerable are you
well it's not just us actually we have
to look at this again from an EU and
from a NATO perspective I mean we have a
we have a neighboring country Norway who
has gas fields and oil fields where you
can see where the underwater cables are
essential economy and I think that we
have to understand that this is also a
new type of of time which we are living
in and the attitude of my government is
that we need more cooperation with our
neighbors more cooperation with our our
NATO allies in order to to count
this and and that c of course both more
um how should say capabilities when it
comes to surveying situations underwater
and luckily Sweden has good capabilities
already but we also would like to see
more cooperation on this because this is
not something which is going away we can
see that this will be a could be a very
dangerous tool tools for for adversaries
to use against countries like Sweden
Estonia and Finland in this case and
finland's foreign minister said the two
underseas links have probably been
damaged on purpose do you agree is it
likely sabotage who's behind it Russia
uh well again I need to say that I'm not
going to attribute this to any country
right now there is a police
investigation under way when that is
finalized and the prosecutor has said
what they they need to say I might be
able to to do a public statement on this
but before that I'm not going to do it I
think that would be wrong with me as a
minister to do so let's talk about your
membership in NATO uh which uh has long
been blocked by turkey Turkish president
r t Tye erdogan has just submitted a
bill approving your membership bid to
his Parliament for
ratification in general though how how
disappointed are you in the process and
the demands that turkey has been placing
on
you uh I've said it many times before
and I'll say it again that the
memorandum signed in Madrid at the The
Summit in Madrid last year was important
because it meant that Sweden undertook
certain responsibilities for changes
that were legit legitimate on behalf of
of turke and those changes have been
conducted that means that we now combat
the organization pkk's activities in my
country in a more coherent way taking
measures which had led to people being
handed verdicts in our Courts for an
example A man was handed a verdict just
two weeks ago a 4 and a half year
sentence for armed robbery with a Clear
Connection of get getting money to send
to the pkk now the pkk doesn't conduct
terrorist operations as such on on
directed against Sweden on a territory
but they collect money which were used
to terrorist activities against Tura so
turkey have had legitimate claims but
The Summit in vus this summer meant that
turkey acknowledged that Sweden had
fulfilled our part of the bargain and
that means also that the pro the start
of the ratification process now under
way in the Parliament is a is a firm
sign of this um but you know I mean
there was the recent comment though
however from from the Turkish vice
president saying that we we don't see a
satisfactory level of implementation um
when we talk about those measures that
you have taken um we have also seen um
erdogan uh you know make a request from
from the United States um including the
US selling F-16 fighter jets to turkey
as a precondition to your accession you
know you've already taken all these
measures that you've highlighted there
when is it just too much for
Sweden what are your red
lines well first of all this is a
fundamental change of Swedish foreign
and security policy the largest one in
200 years we have been a non-military
aligned country for for two centuries so
of course a question of a few months
doesn't mean very much in that
perspective and we are not disappointed
at all on the contrary yesterday's news
were of course source of joy but we
aren't through yet we need to see the
full ratification process happening in
Tura and then of course also in Hungary
and yeah let's talk more about Hungary
because they must also sign up um there
the foreign minister has written you a
very pointed uh letter um asking you to
um stop your politicians and press from
criticizing hungary's democracy
otherwise it won't ratify your accession
the hungarians even uploaded that letter
to Twitter uh and of course they know
that you can't control uh what
opposition politicians or press might be
saying because of freedom of speech laws
so what do you think is at play here the
Hungarian government just looking for
excuses to feel insulted and how
concerning is
this I think that the Turkish govern
sorry the Hungarian Parliament has been
very clear on the matter saying that we
won't be the last the last to ratify
Sweden that has been repeated both by
prime minister Victor Orban and also by
my foreign minister calling and that
means that uh Hungary has already
committed itself once the process in in
Turkey is underway as it is now we
expect ratification to start in the
Hungarian Parliament as well and they
only have the final vote left they've
already done the committee work in the
Parliament and also just on on that on
that same line there is a difference
also between Tura and Hungary with Tura
we have had a memorandum clear
memorandum clear State clear Stakes uh
with Hungary never asked for anything
like that when they accepted that Sweden
were given the stat as the invite at
last year Summit in in Madrid so I think
that the Hungarian Parliament should
move on with the ratification and that
is the clear position of the Swedish
government some especially in the global
South are looking at the wars in Ukraine
and the Middle East as an approach that
is laced with double standards one
analyst um saying there's a perception
that the West cares more about Ukrainian
refugees about Ukrainian civilian
suffering than suffering in Yemen in
Gaza in Sudan and Syria um the former
Swedish prime minister Carl Bild has
said the following this is something
that we must deal with first of all do
you even recognize that there could be a
double standard at play and how do you
deal with
it well we have been very clear from our
PA on our path um especially in my
statement which I delivered at the
United Nations General Assembly where I
said very clearly that we need to take
into account that the Ukrainian conflict
is something which you know is of
importance to all the world because it
means that if Ukraine were to lose the
rules based World Order and the UN
Charter would be gone and those are
principles which means a lot to our
Global Partners wherever they are in the
world and this is a good platform to
stand on but I do acknowledge what you
say we have to to take we shouldn't have
any double standards we should apply the
same standards when it comes to atro is
committed and we should also mean that
means that the humanitarian problems
which we now see in gasa needs to be
solved in order for this to be um you
know a credible policy operated by the
EU some diplomats are warning that the
West is losing the global South what is
the danger here if this situation is is
not handled well by the EU if the South
does not perceive that the West is
handling the situation well and
equitably well that could be a
definitely could be a threat but I think
that we are doing the right thing right
now with both seeking a reach out to the
Arab world in looking for Solutions both
to the hostage crisis in relation to the
terrorist organization Hamas and also
the question of humanitarian P when it
comes to Gaza and ultimately the
two-state solution which needs to be
brought forward only by operating on all
these levels at the same time can we
maintain credibility uh on the global
level foreign minister bstrm we have to
leave it there thank you so much for
joining us on conflict Zone thank you
for your
time thank you very
[Music]
[Applause]
much
[Music]